---
date: 2024-04-26T23:22:16+00:00
title: "Chitting the chat"
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: "Meeting with some of my opinion-havers, to hear what opinions they have."
tags:
- week notes
- work
- policy making
# posse:
# - 
---

I've had a pleasant change of pace this week: fewer internal meetings, a bit more time for thinking and planning, and lots of time to speak to some of our programme's ~~stakeholders~~ *opinion-havers*.

My team has a very regular cadence of meetings with representatives from hundreds of external organisations; and I try to get out and about to talk about what we're doing and listen to what people think of it as often as I can. Partly because it's a good thing to do – open policy making is the way our team likes to work – but also because I like doing it.

One particular meeting stood out this week. We were asked some pretty challenging questions, and I was the most senior person in the room from our side, so the buck stopped with me for providing cogent answers!

Now, any civil servant worth their weight in rubber-stamps can blather their way through a question they don't really have an answer to; but I didn't need to. The questions might have been probing and they might have been posed in ways I'd not been confronted by before, but that didn't matter. Not only did I have answers, I felt like I had a *great* answer to every question, right on the tip of my tongue. I didn't have to think about it. I didn't have to check my notes. I was just – *dare I say* – effortlessly on top of it.

It's probably the first time since joining this programme back in 2022 that I'd clocked my own imposter syndrome. There have been *many* moments in the past two years that I've felt out of my depth, but I think this week has made me realise that, actually, I *really* know what I'm doing now. And that's a great feeling to end the week on.