---
date: 2025-03-09T18:20:00+00:00
title: "How novel!"
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: "Actual, in person, all day, multi-day training."
---

## This week at work

I’ve been on training this week. Actual, in person, all day, multi-day training. How novel!

It’s been a good opportunity to formalise a bunch of on the job learning from the past 2 years. Better still, because it’s been small-group and slow-pace training, I’ve had the opportunity to just ask lots of questions of a person with lots more knowledge and experience than me. Super useful!

It’s been a blessing and a curse that the trainer’s laptop didn’t connect to the screens in the office so she used mine to show her slide decks instead. That meant I *couldn’t* get distracted by emails, IMs and whatnot; but I also now have lots of work to catch up on!

In the gaps, I’ve been trying to push a bunch of commercial stuff over the crest of the hill, so others can then roll the work down it. (That’s a clumsy metaphor, but that’s my jam).

More widely I'm on annual leave next week, so I have a tonne of stuff to handover. 

## This week at home

I’m trying to re-establish my coping strategies by giving my brain a chance to flick into auto-pilot as much as possible. 

My current solace is video games. I’ve concluded my play-through of *Jedi: Survivor* and nabbed the Platinum trophy; that makes 18 now! I’ve moved onto *Lies of P*; a *SoulsBorne*-like in vein of *[Bloodborne](https://www.johnpe.art/game/1735476840/)*. Based on a few hours of gameplay so far, it feels almost too easy -- but maybe I’m just better at these kinds of games than I used to be.

## Found interesting

- I might get my own version of this [MI5 coffee mug that’s precisely imprecise](https://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2025/03/precisely-imprecise.html)
- This bait-and-switch on [building websites with LLMS](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2025/lots-of-little-html-pages/) has inspired me to try this out for myself! 