---
date: 2025-03-21T18:50:00+00:00
title: "Euphoria!"
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: "A pleasant Swedish diversion to break up the week."
---

I had last week off – and boy did I need the break. I got the sense that my team were slightly sick of me telling them about how clean my balcony decking was, following said annual leave, but that serves them right for asking how my week off was!

I was confronted with no fewer than 200 emails when I switched on my work laptop on Monday morning. The vast majority of them are still there, because I've received what felt like another 200 since! Between some challenging stakeholder engagement, dealing with some tricky operational issues, taking part in user research sessions, and trying to tackle that onslaught of digital communication; it's felt a bit relentless once again this week. 

I'm getting to the point now where I have to implement “the Boomerang Principle” – *if it's important, it will come back* – and just hope that I don't miss anything.

---

This horrendously busy week has been punctuated with a brief Scandinavian diversion. On Wednesday evening I was at the *Hammersmith Apollo* to see one of my all-time favourite artists: *Loreen*. 

Yes, that *Loreen*. The one from Eurovision. [The one with the waffle-iron](https://youtu.be/BE2Fj0W4jP4?si=jT5xV5H-IqKE2OqK&t=29). 

I've seen her once before; in 2016, at the *Tele2 Arena* in Stockholm, when I was at a Eurovision pre-party. My lasting impression of that experience was of the bass from her Eurovision-debut song, *Euphoria*, rattling the very fibre of my being. The event at the *Apollo* was a bit more subdued, but nonetheless a fun experience. 

Would do again... and I will, because I already have tickets to see her somewhere else over the summer!