---
date: 2025-01-24T18:32:00+00:00
title: ""
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: ""
categories:
- weeknotes
- work
- personal

kanban:
- section: "To do"
  items:
  - SEO interviews
- section: "Doing"
  items:
  - *Wrestling with MS Teams*
  - Scheme updates
  - Register transition
- section: "Done"
  items:
  - Bill briefings
  - *Sick days!*
  - Stakeholder meetings
---

## Friends to visit

Last weekend, one of my best friends was over visiting from Ireland. I had no grand plans for what to do whilst he was over, so I decided to keep it local and try to build a weekend of stuff just in Croydon. And I managed to pull it off!

On Saturday we tried out the local bouldering centre (he was infuriatingly good at it, for a beginner!), we did an escape room, enjoyed a pint int he local pub and had food in a few very nice places. 

I am a bit of a downer on Croydon most of the time – it is in desperate need of some urban renewal – but actually, there are plenty of nice places to do stuff, if you look hard enough.

## This week at work

In news that will bring smiles to many, this week I completely lost my voice – in amongst a myriad of other flu-like symptoms. I've had to take a few days off, as a result, and a less productive week than I'd have liked.

{% include "components/objects/kanban.html" %}

Despite the illness, I've managed to do some meaningful bits of work. 

On Monday, I briefed members of the House of Lords prior to Report Stage. We got a “thank you” during the debate itself for having provided the briefing; so I guess that means it went well! 

I've also had the pleasure of meeting with some of our stakeholders  this week, to update on our work and learn from what they're doing too. 

In more operational matters, the team continues to support the transition of providers from our existing ‘trusted list’ to our new digital service. I've been pitching in, responding to emails, doing the admin on our back-end service, and working with the digital team to steer the ship to fix some bugs.

That's been just about all I've had time for!