---
date: 2025-01-03T22:04:00+00:00
title: "Week #1"
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: "The start of my weeknoting for 2025."
categories:
- weeknotes
- work
- personal

kanban:
- section: "To do"
  items:
  - Bill briefing
  - Business case updates
  - Scheme recognition meeting
  - Q3 roadmap review
  - Q4 roadmapping
- section: "Doing"
  items:
  - Bill briefing prep
  - FOI #2 and #3
  - Blog posts on our register
- section: "Done"
  items:
  - FOI #1
  - Catching up on Christmas emails (!)
  - Blog post on certification
---

It's the first Friday of 2025 and my first weeknote of the year. This year I've decided to give weeknoting a serious go, to share what I'm working on, what's going on in my life and share stuff I've stumbled on.

## This week at work

I'm going to try a new thing with this weeknote; sharing a rough Kanban board from my week.

{% include "components/objects/kanban.html" %}

It's been a very short week – I've only been in on Thursday and Friday, following a mostly restful Christmas break. Most of the team aren't back to work until Monday, so it's been a mercifully quiet couple of days but I haven't had much time to do anything significant.

### Never ending emails

Somehow, I've returned to no fewer than 80 unread emails. *How does that even happen over Christmas?!* Anyway, I've cleared the backlog... mostly.

### Freedom of Information

Some of those emails related to Freedom of Information Act requests. I am all for being transparent about what government is up to – I passionately believe in open-policy making, after all – but FOIs are just so irritating. 

It's not the requests themselves that are the problem; it's that they prompt the wrong behaviours. In each of the 3 FOIs I've been dealing with this week, the requestors would likely have gotten a better, clearer answer if they'd just written a letter to us asking what we're doing. But they didn't do that; they made an FOI request, which prompts a merry-go-round of process that is mostly pointless and benefits no one. 

One of the FOIs has been dispatched with; two more to resolve next week.

### Blogging 

I've published [a new blog post on the “Enabling digital identity” blog](https://enablingdigitalidentity.blog.gov.uk/2025/01/03/certification-independent-assurance-that-the-rules-are-being-followed/). This one attempts to explain, in straightforward terms, how we're using certification to build trust.

I've also been working on 2 other blog posts, due for publication soon, that explain some other elements of the programme. I need to wait for some other people to feedback and contribute on those before they're ready though! You can [subscribe to the blog](https://enablingdigitalidentity.blog.gov.uk/subscribe/) to be notified by email when we post them.

### Bill stuff

Next week, we'll be briefing some members of the House of Lords on our legislation and how our policy works. So I've been doing a little prep work ahead of that during *this* week. 

I like doing this kind of Parliament-facing work; it's important that parliamentarians get to engage in the detail with the people doing the work, so that our wider democratic processes work.

### Next week

Aside from the briefing, next week I hope to turn my attention to Spending Review preparations and that means updating our business case. I also have a meeting with UKAS to discuss our latest certification scheme iteration and their feedback prior to it being formally recognised; which is likely to generate a little bit of work of its own! 

## Outside of work

### Goals

I've set myself some [new goals for 2025](/goals/2025) this week and written up [a blog post about it](/2025/01/01/setting-goals-for-2025/). Fingers crossed I can stick to these slightly less ambitious goals; day 3 and I'm still on track so far!

### Gaming
Continuing my latest ~~fad~~ I mean, *hobby*, I've taken delivery of some new *Game Boy* flash cartridges this week, which will allow me to create backups of aging *Game Paks* which have seen better days. One of them is a dud – so that's going to have to go back – but the rest seem to work brilliantly.

I've kicked off a replay of the *Plucky Squire* on *PlayStation*  this week. I really enjoyed playing this through last year, and I'm going back through it to pick up the Platinum trophy.

### Website updates

I've been tinkering with my website again over Christmas and New Year; adding some new designs for [my games pages](/games). I'll write more about that separately.

### Star Trek

I've started a rewatch of *Star Trek: Voyager* for about the millionth time. No matter how great the new *Trek* shows get, I can't stop myself from going back to *Voyager*, *Deep Space 9* and *The Next Generation* for some comfort TV.

## Found interesting

Having read [Russell's](https://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/) book – [*Doing interesting*](https://thedobook.co/products/do-interesting-notice-collect-share) – last year, I've  started to collect *stuff* that I found interesting in an app on my phone ([Reeder](https://reederapp.com), if you're interested). Borrowing some inspiration from [Neil's weeknotes](https://neilojwilliams.net), I'm going to share some of it here. 

- The National Archives has released [Cabinet committee papers about New Labour's identity cards legislation](https://cdn.nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/release-2024-12/PREM49-3562.pdf). Given my job at the moment, this is probably more interesting to me than it is to anyone else!
- Speaking earlier of Spending Reviews, I found [this blog post by Peter Thomas](https://www.civilservicereformuk.com/single-post/it-is-time-to-confront-the-2-great-lies-of-uk-spending-reviews) an interesting read. 
- [I stumbled upon](/share/1735770240/) [“Lynn and Tonic”](https://lynnandtonic.com/) – the personal website of Lynn Fisher. [Just awesome](https://www.johnpe.art/share/1735770240/).
- [Mattias Ott has published his latest Own Your Web newsletter](https://buttondown.com/ownyourweb/archive/issue-17/); loads of useful BlueSky starter packs and links to some CSS tricks in this one. He also highlights Lynn's website.