---
date: 2025-10-10T09:00:00+00:00
title: "October 2025"
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: "Things about me, since the last time I told you things about me."
---

## Home

After two years of "doing long-distance", I'm now – finally – living with my partner, Matt. For his consultant doctor training, he's now been posted at a hospital that is commutable from my place in Croydon, so he's moved in with me. I'll miss the regular trips to Brighton that have been more of a joy than a chore for the past couple of years; but we have already committed to regular trips elsewhere to make up for for the absence of our seaside jaunts.

## Work

I continue to work at the [Office for Digital Identities and Attributes](//gov.uk/ofdia) – a part of the [Department for Science, Innovation and Technology](//www.gov.uk/dsit). I'm now running that team. It’s an increasingly complex thing to work on, and I'm trying to not let it also become complicated.

Whilst I've been in the team for almost 3 and a half years, being accountable for the whole unit is quite new. I suspect I have a big learning curve ahead of me but I'm ready for the challenge.

## Relaxing

My momentary, intense interest in retro-gaming – mostly focused around the *Game Boy* system – has mostly abated, and I've started oscillating between my other hobbies again recently. 

I'm still spending probably too much time playing the *PlayStation*.

I've just finished what I think is now my fourth full rewatch of *Star Trek: Voyager* and my third of *Star Trek: The Next Generation*. I'm yet to catch up on Season 5 of *Lower Decks*, *Discovery* or Seasons 2 and 3 of *Strange New Worlds*. I think that makes me a "bad Trekkie". 




> This is a “[Now](//nownownow.com)” page: a look at what’s going on in my life right now.