---
date: 2026-01-16T20:00:00+00:00
title: "Weeknote #1 of 2026"
author: "John Peart"
excerpt: "Somehow it’s already the end of the second, full, working week of 2026. How did that happen?!"
---

Somehow it’s already the end of the second, full, working week of 2026. How did that happen?!

I’ve come back to work with a lot of new energy. 

Last year, my team landed a huge amount of work. Almost everything we’ve been working to achieve from the last 4 years is now “done”. That provides an opportunity for a really meaningful conversation about what we prioritise and do next, to deliver the mission to enable the use of digital identity products across the economy.

Given that opportunity exists, we’re having an away day. I’ve spent a bit of time over the past two weeks plotting that out. The plan is to talk about *the plan* but I also want to spend a good chunk of time talking about the team we want to be next culturally. 

As the last fortnight has progressed, I’ve also realised the volume of my work is going up, up, up! 

That’s forcing me to reassess:

1. my approach to prioritisation and delegation
2. how I keep track of what I need to do

I’m not sure I’ve figured out the answer to the first yet, but I have started to get to grips with the second... with the help of a new physical object!

I’ve bought one of these – the [*To-Do Deck*](https://markedbytime.com/products/wooden-to-do-list-card-holder-minimalist-desk-organiser-maple-or-walnut) – which appears to be a British-made version of the [*Ugmonk Analog*](https://ugmonk.com/en-gb/products/analog-starter-kit?variant=36903475150998&selling_plan=937066646).

I’ve been trying it out for 2 weeks now and, as a task management approach, I really like it! It’s in your face, always in your eye line, and beautifully minimalist.

But there are some flaws:

1. I’m a hybrid worker, so it’s already been challenging to keep to the system across my home and work office locations. 
2. My handwriting is *massive*, so the teeny tiny cards are a bit small for me to brain dump what I need on them.

Nonetheless, I like this approach so much that I’ve stuck with it. It’s inspired me to start a little side project to turn it into an app; more on that, soon.

That’s enough for now. I’m off to catch up on *The Traitors* and revel in Claudia Winkleman’s glee at the drama of it all.